CANCER IDENTIFICATION FROM DNA MICROARRAY GENE     
EXPRESSION DATA AND ITS STATISTICAL ANALYSIS.

OVERVIEW:
Cancer is a major leading cause of death and responsible for around 13% of all deaths world-wide. 
Cancer incidence rate is growing at an alarming rate in the world. Despite the fact that cancer is
preventable and curable in early stages, the vast majority of patients are diagnosed with cancer very late.
Therefore, it is of paramount importance to prevent and detect cancer early. Microarray basedgene expression 
profiling has been emerged as an efficient technique for cancer classification, as well as for diagnosis, prognosis, 
and treatment purposes. In recent years, DNA microarray technique has gained more attraction in both scientific and 
in industrial fields.  It showed great importance in determining the informative genesthat can cause the cancer. 
Studing cancer microarray gene expression data is a challenging task becausemicroarray is high dimensional-low sample 
dataset with a lot of noisy or irrelevant genes and missing data.

In this project, we conduct a comprehensive study that focuses on exploring the main objectives and approaches
that have been applied using cancer microarray gene expression profile.

Conventional Method of Diagnosis: Conventional methods of detecting and diagnosing cancer rely solely on skilled 
physicians, with the help of medical imaging, to detect certain symptoms that usually appear in the late stages of cancer.

Drawback:
i)	Delay in diagnosing cancer leads to spreads it to other parts of the body, can have a huge effect on survival.
ii)	Once a cancer has spread, it is often harder to treat successfully and chances of surviving are much lower.

Proposed Method:Microarray based gene expression profiling method has become an important and promising approach that
can be used for cancer classification. The objective of our project is two-fold. First of all we want to select the
most informative genes which are crucial for cancer classification. For this we need to apply data dimensionality 
reduction technique for removing the irrelevant genes. We want to develop an efficient gene selection technique with
higher accuracy and also which takes minimum computational time. Then these informative genes need to undergo suitable 
clustering techniques. If we can find the tendency of cluster formation then we can predict that there is a chance of 
cancerous growth and hence early detection of cancer will be possible and proper treatment can be done. 
The most important objectives of microarray dataset are to classify unknown tissue samples according to their 
expression profiles. Microarray data suffers from the curse of dimensionality, the small number of samples, and 
the level of irrelevant and noise genes. These make the classification task of a test sample a very challenging problem. 
As a consequence, it is important to eliminate those irrelevant genes and identify the informative genes that are why a 
feature selection problem is crucial in gene expression data analysis. Therefore, the first step in processing the 
expression data is to identify a small subset of genes that are primarily responsible for the cancer. It is required to 
use a gene selection process as a mandatory step before we start any cancer classification approach on a microarray 
dataset. Thus, we can conclude that the main objectives of many studies using DNA microarrays can be classified into 
three major groups: Gene finding, Class discovery, and Class prediction. 

Advantages of Proposed Method: 
i)	We can diagnosis cancer in early stages.
ii)	Helps in giving effective chemotherapy treatment

DATA:
We are taking dataset from following website.
https://www.arabidopsis.org/portals/expression/microarray/microarrayDatasetsV2.jsp



           Operating System		: Windows
           Technology			: Java and J2EE
           Web Technologies		: Html, JavaScript, CSS
           IDE				: My Eclipse
           Web Server			: Tomcat
           Database			: My SQL
           Java Version		        : J2SDK1.5             

RESEARCH QUESTIONS:
We are trying to find out better techniques with higher accuracy for gene selection gives fast and better results for 
cancer diagnosis.

MODELS AND ANALYSIS:
We are planning to apply different algorithms such as Decision Tree algorithm, Bayes algorithm.

PROJECT MANAGEMENT:		           
Team Members	              Roles and Skills	                           Contributions
Srinivas Maganti	      Coding  and Data Analysis	                   Html and Clustering of data
Rajkumar Thodeti	      Coding  and Data Analysis	                   Java script and classification of data
Sreevenu Mudigondla	      Coding, Data filtering and preprocessing     CSS and SQL


DELIVERABLES AND CHECKPOINTS:
Checkpoint date	Expected Deliverable	Responsible team member(s)	Checkpoint results
			
			
			
			

References:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Frequently Asked Questions about Colorectal Cancer. 2012.
http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/colorectal/basic_info/faq.htm 

Gorodkin, Jan. “Comparing two K-category assignments by a K-category correlation coe?cient.”
Computational Biology and Chemistry vol. 28, no. 5-6, pp. 367-374. 2004.
 
Iacopetta, Barry. “TP53 Mutation in Colorectal Cancer”. Human Mutation vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 271-276. 2003. 

Susan G. Komen for the Cure. Molecular Subtypes of Breast Cancer. 2011.
http://ww5.komen. org/BreastCancer/SubtypesofBreastCancer.html
 
Wikipedia. Cancer. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cance. 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matthews_correlation_coefficient 
Witten, Ian H. and Frank, Eibe. Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, 2nd edition. 
Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco. 2005.














